# School Privatizers Are Leaning Hard Into the Culture Wars

## Article by Nora De La Cour 

<https://jacobin.com/2022/05/right-school-privatization-choice-crt-capitalism>

## Notes by Charles Carter

*NOTE 0: None of us is perfect. We all have our faults. No one has a monopoly
on The Truth, but we all have a glimmer of truth somewhere. These notes are an
attempt at a conversation. If I sound dogmatic, I honestly reject dogma, but
recognize that there is a difference between truth and falsehood, and that we
should seek and speak the truth, but call falsehood by its proper name.*


In a Massachusetts school district neighboring the one where I work, four parents, backed by a conservative Christian organization, are suing the school committee and multiple district employees for calling students by their preferred names and pronouns without informing home. Because one of the defendants is a counselor, some of my counselor peers in the area are now on guard, afraid we could become the targets of litigation if we allow students to broach sensitive topics in our presence.

*NOTE 1: The litigation seeks to enforce compliance with applicable law and
policies, which state that the parents of children under 14 (as in this case)
have the authority to decide these matters. If the school and school employees
do not comply with these requirements, litigation may be the appropriate
solution. The particulars involve pronouns, the gravamen of the suit involves
violation of legal requirements by the defendants.*

Setting aside the very real harm that kids and educators are exposed to as a result of the Right’s eagerness to link acknowledgement of gay and trans people to sexual predation, there’s another problem here. It’s incredibly difficult to teach or counsel someone if you can’t call them what they wish to be called. Addressing students by their chosen names is a basic sign of respect that says, “I see you and I’m here to work with you.” If you need to call home to get permission first — potentially outing kids to their parents and inviting distressing blowback — you might miss the chance to form the human connection that undergirds collaborative scholarship.

*NOTE 2: Not only is there no evidence of linking of gay/trans identities to
sexual predation, it would seem that there is a real harm in excluding the
possibility of sexual predation in cases where young children are struggling
with their sexual identity. This also sets up a conflict between educators and
parents, but educators and parents should work together, and not keep secrets
from one another, to promote the well being of the children.*

Pandemic school closures reminded us that the social aspects of schooling are among the most vital for young people’s development and for society at large. Specific facts and figures (the what of school learning) can be easily forgotten and recalled with a few keystrokes. But the ability to establish a base level of trust with heterogeneous others in order to solve shared problems (the how of school learning) is absolutely essential for both a fulfilling personal life and engagement in the public square. It’s critical that educators be allowed to build that trust without fear of reprisal.

*NOTE 3: If this is true (and I believe that it is), establishing a basic
level of trust with others particularly includes children's parents, who after
all have the closest familial relationship with their children. Cutting
parents out of the lives of their children works against the ideal of building
a level of trust with heterogeneous others.*

Libertarian billionaires and Republican strategists intend to motivate voters in the short term and fully privatize K-12 education in the long term.

*NOTE 4: Where is the evidence? One or two may, that's all. Otherwise, this
statement is unequivocally false!*

The Koch-backed parents’ rights movement aims to make that trust impossible. By pitting parents against schools, libertarian billionaires and Republican strategists intend to motivate voters in the short term and fully privatize K-12 education in the long term. As Christopher Rufo, the self-styled architect of the so-called war on critical race theory (CRT), has argued, “To create universal school choice [i.e., privatization], you really need to operate from a premise of universal school distrust.” Those powering the campaign against classroom “wokeness” are trying to hinder our ability to establish common ground from which to defend our last remaining public goods.

*NOTE 5: Not only is Rufo misquoted, but this actually proves the point he
made. If school counselors lie (by omission) to parents, doesn't that by
itself create distrust? Besides, characterizing public schools as "our last
remaining public goods" is simply laughable. As to Rufo's point, the
accumulation of power in any form, especially power over education, is evil in
itself, and private individuals as parents should take responsibility for
education their own children, and not abdicate that responsibility to
government-run institutions.*

The illiberalism that dominates the Right can best be understood as the advanced stage of a long billionaire-funded plot to undo democracy in order to relieve capitalists of any constraints the rest of us might wish to place on them. This understanding clarifies why classrooms, the training grounds for democratic participation, are primary targets of radical right activism. If liberals are to have any hope of countering this coordinated attack, they need to remember the collective, public value of education.

*NOTE 6: This seems to be your main point, and is worth an extended
discussion.  Briefly, in the United States currently, the Right represents
genuine liberalism, while the Left seeks to undo a democratic form of
government and replace it with a collectivist tyranny. "Democracy" consists of
the full moral and legal equality of all citizens, the steadfast defense of
inalienable liberties (including the right of property), and a majoritarian
form of government. The Left aims to undermine all three of these elements.
More on this below.*

## Laying Siege to the Common Good

It makes sense to focus on the reactionary nature of all of this: the commitment to American exceptionalism animating the so-called CRT bans, the fresh fixation on classical education rife with chauvinist dog whistles, and the shockingly overt bigotry of the anti-LGBT “grooming” discourse. Ron DeSantis’s Florida, as some have observed, is looking more and more like Viktor Orbán’s Hungary. But while these efforts to reverse cultural change are incredibly alarming, we come up short when we try to understand what’s happening purely in terms of identity-based hatred. Intolerance has always been a feature of American politics. Why does it suddenly seem so viciously well-organized?

*NOTE 7: Okay, let's focus on (1) American exceptionalism, (2) classical
education, and (3) traditional notions of sexual morals and family values.
This is a discussion that we should by all means engage in.*

In Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical Right’s Stealth Plan for America, historian Nancy MacLean argues that above all else, the activists who now own the conservative mantle seek what she calls property rights supremacy. The billionaire-backed network of free market fundamentalists looking to, in Christopher Rufo’s words, “lay siege” to public institutions are happy to form productive alliances with both evangelical Christians and white supremacists. But more than white supremacy or biblical supremacy, their end goal is a world in which the wealthiest corporations and individuals are liberated from any responsibility to contribute to the common good. When Manhattan Institute fellows like Rufo or ALEC-steeped politicians like DeSantis discuss “freedom,” this is what they really mean.

*NOTE 8: There's too much here to unpack it all. It will suffice to point out
that liberty and property are the same thing. Liberty and property are
fungible --- you can trade your liberty for property and trade your property
for liberty. Taking a person's liberty and taking a person's property has the
same effect: reducing the person to slavery. Slavery consists of depriving the
slave of both his liberty and his property. You can't have liberty without
property, and taking one requires taking the other as well. See NOTE 6 above.*

More than white supremacy or biblical supremacy, their end goal is a world in which the wealthiest are liberated from any responsibility to contribute to the common good.
Focusing on the career of the Pulitzer Prize–winning economist James McGill Buchanan, MacLean traces the lineage of this radical movement to “insulate private property rights from the reach of government.” The Chicago-trained Buchanan became chair of the University of Virginia’s (UVA) economics department just as Virginia’s governing elites were launching their massive resistance policy to prevent desegregation by, if need be, ending public schooling altogether. Massive resistance attracted the support of libertarians, including Northerners, who saw Brown v. Board of Education as the latest example of federal overreach. They argued that Virginia’s propertied elites should not be coerced to pay taxes for goods — in this case, integrated public schools — they didn’t care for.

*NOTE 9: Your argument doesn't support your premise. We all agree that racial
discrimination and prejudice is evil and has no place in a just society. We
also agree that all citizens should share in the burden of maintaining the
commonwealth. However, it is emphatically not the province of government to
decide that Peter has too much, that Paul has too little, and to take from
Peter and give to Paul. This is true whether Peter is rich and Paul is poor,
or whether Peter is poor and Paul is rich. Paying taxes for the common good is
one thing; exactions from one person for the personal benefit of another is
quite another thing. The purpose of government is to protect life, liberty,
and property, without which the concept of liberalism is meaningless. See NOTE
6.*

*NOTE 10: This separate note is to point out that you cannot legislate
morality, including racial prejudice. Being a racist is not a crime, and to
make it a crime, you would have to criminalize thought. People are free to
harbor racial prejudice if they wish to, and certainly no entity, and
especially the government, which after all has a monopoly on the use of force,
should have the authority to control the thoughts of people. This is not
defending racism --- it's defending freedom of conscience, thought, and
speech.*

From his perch at UVA, Buchanan and a colleague developed a scholarly response to Brown that sought to elevate the economic liberty cause from the brutal racism attracting media attention to the South. Together, they advocated unlimited public school privatization in a last-ditch effort to preserve segregation by asserting property rights and state’s rights in the face of the New Deal’s legacy of robust federal action. But ordinary white Virginians, prejudiced though most undoubtedly were, didn’t buy it. And when push came to shove, a majority of Virginia legislators recognized that, in MacLean’s words, “a fire sale of tax-funded public schools to private operators would be political suicide.” So the effort failed.

*NOTE 11: The fact that a good thing is used to further a bad cause does not mean we should destroy the good thing. We settled the debate over public education long ago. Besides, you will recall that the first impetus for universal education came from the Christian church, and that the first schools were church related. Not that this proves anything, but it kind of works against your (unstated) hypothesis that Christianity and education are antagonistic.*

MacLean describes how this experience solidified Buchanan’s view that politicians are hopelessly “corruptible” by popular pressure. At the dawn of the civil rights movement, more Americans were feeling that they could work together to build a better world. In order to protect the wealthiest minority from being forced to fund a growing list of public goods, Buchanan decided, collectivism and representative government would need to be dramatically curtailed. The institutions that enable these things to flourish must be hollowed out.

*NOTE 12: Lord Acton noted that "Power tends to corrupt; absolute power
corrupts absolutely." In this regard, collectivism and representative
government are hostile to each other. The more collectivist the less
democratic, and the more democratic the less collectivist. This is true
because collectivism means taking a person's property, and therefore his
liberty. See NOTE 8.*

Following the New Deal, MacLean writes, there was a common sense of trust in the federal government and in the public institutions it provided. Only by sowing widespread suspicion of those institutions would it become possible to take them away, reducing taxes for the wealthiest few and leaving all the rest of us defenseless against the harshest blows of capitalism. When Buchanan joined forces with the plutocrat Charles Koch, his plan was put into action by a vast network of operatives intent on rendering popular demands lastingly ineffective (as in Augusto Pinochet’s constitution for Chile, which Buchanan helped to design).

*NOTE 13: Perhaps this is true because, following the New Deal, the government
tended toward collectivism. It would be surprising if people didn't develop a
distrust of government.*

With this understanding, it’s easy to see the connective tissue between today’s Koch-backed, energetically cultivated loci of parental outrage. At the engine level, this movement is not about what schools are teaching kids. It’s about burning down public schooling along with every other institution or regulation on which the public depends. Think what you will about mask mandates, the 1619 Project, or the pedagogical methods espoused by the blue-haired TikTok teachers Chaya Raichik cruelly serves up for Twitter pile-ons. These cultural battle sites are used to generate division and paranoia while billionaires rewrite the rules of our polity to permanently serve their ends.

*NOTE 14: Again, there's too much to unpack here. I'll just note that a root
cause of many societal and cultural disfunctionalities stems from a breakdown
of our deepest values. Read "moral values and family values" if you will;
these are important regardless of your personal beliefs. The issue of
collectivism versus democracy has as a significant underpinning the cultural
battle.*

This movement is about burning down public schooling along with every other institution or regulation on which the public depends.

*NOTE 15: Not proven, and not even evidenced. This is just a bare statement
without any substantiation.*

## Privatizers On the March

A“fire sale” of tax-funded schooling is now proceeding rapidly across numerous states. A recent Network for Public Education report shows that Republican-led state legislatures used the pandemic as an opportunity to push through legislation expanding charter programs and voucher programs (reminiscent of the voucher program Buchanan proposed to enable white Virginian children to attend “segregation academies” on the public dime). These programs divert public school dollars into the hands of frequently discriminatory or fraudulent private operators who, in some cases, have little obligation to teach kids anything at all.

*NOTE 16: Why shouldn't school tax revenue go to the benefit of school
children, rather to the benefit of government? Don't confuse what is good for
public, i.e., government-run, schools, with what is good for the children.
Besides, we have remedies for the abuse or misuse of educational funds.*

In some states, like New Hampshire, with education savings accounts (ESAs), parents who have never considered enrolling their children in public school can sign up to be paid for supporting private or religious schools. In the first year of its ESA program, New Hampshire lost $8 million from its education coffers, as a majority of private school parents opted to subtract money from the state’s public schools. Such defunding mechanisms are hitting school systems already battered by severe pandemic-related challenges and over a decade of postrecession disinvestment.

*NOTE 17: If public schools are out competed by private or religious schools.
perhaps they should lose revenue. This is how things work in the "real world."
Witness Montgomery Wards, Sears, K-Mart, Service Merchandise, and other too
numerous to mention. If public schools did as good a job as private or
religious schools, they would retain their market share.*

*NOTE 18: A personal note: I have children and grandchildren, and my wife
retired as a public school teacher. From time to time we took advantage of
private, religious, and home schooling because of the extremely poor quality
of the public schools. Regardless, I still paid taxes supporting the poor
public schools in addition to private school costs. As the Soviets used to
say, it's no accident that education consumers are abandoning public schools.*

Collectivism and representative government would need to be dramatically curtailed. The institutions that enable these things to flourish must be hollowed out.
With a conservative-majority Supreme Court signaling its willingness to overturn long-standing precedents, Texas governor Greg Abbott announced his intention to challenge a ruling that guarantees free public education for all kids. While Abbott has focused his message on undocumented children, relying on xenophobia to drive it home, the reality is that overturning the case in question would undermine public education for everyone.

*NOTE 19: You are flailing. My only comment here is that you have confused
public schools with public education. I would agree that we should have
universal public education. I would disagree strongly that public schools
should have a monopoly with regard to this responsibility.*

“The Right has always understood better than the Left how to tap some of the most powerful emotions in existence: parents’ love of — and fears for — their children,” Nancy MacLean told Jacobin. Parents always worry about their kids, and the pandemic has introduced new fears about contagion, isolation, and a future that looks increasingly bleak. That mix has made fertile ground for a highly organized and breathtakingly well-funded network of operatives looking to finally do away with public schools and the political “we” they make possible.

*NOTE 20: Okay, Nancy MacLean is correct. When your children and grandchildren
are assaulted in public schools, when they are victims of theft, when some
so-called "teachers" demonstrate an abysmal ignorance in some areas of their
purported subject matter, you will consider alternatives.*

But despite attention-grabbing campaigns to terrify them, a majority of public school parents remain satisfied with their children’s schooling. And massive amounts of outside funding notwithstanding, local parents’ rights candidates have in numerous cases failed to deliver decisive wins for the privatization movement. As in segregated Virginia, US families are not quite prepared to sign away their children’s right to publicly funded, democratically controlled schools. It’s the perfect time, in other words, for those looking to contest the radical right to offer a full-throated defense of public education and all public goods.

*NOTE 21: You are correct that most parents remain satisfied with public
schools. Most school teachers are caring and competent. Most public school
facilities suit the purpose very well. Most public school administrators are
effective in what they do. Most elected school board officials (and I have
known my local school board members) try hard to meet their responsibilities.
None of this means that private, religious, and home schools have no place.*

But Democrats, by and large, have been unwilling to mount that, scarcely standing up even against the horrific attacks on kids, families, and educators that we are seeing across the United States. And when you look at their record on education, it’s pretty clear why: for the past three decades of education reform, Democrats have ignored the social role that schools play in preparing children for engagement in the public square. Alongside Republicans, they have enabled the privatization of public schools. They have also privatized the idea of schooling down to the individual level. In the view of the Democratic establishment, the sole remit of schools should be to boost “human capital.” Guided by this view, they have yoked the vision of education ever closer to the needs of employers — a kind of corporate indoctrination eerily similar to the “woke” indoctrination Rufo and his cohort tell tales about.

*NOTE 22: I agree that universal public education means much more that career
readiness, and that the core value of universal public education is to teach
humane and liberal values to children. Unfortunately, we fall short, and the
"school culture wars" lessen the commitment to this core value. We agree on
this.*

But Bill Clinton’s assertion that “what you earn depends on what you learn” has proven to be a dangerous oversimplification: Americans are more educated than ever before, and yet economic insecurity is rampant and rising. When public schooling is only justifiable insofar as it increases individual earning power, the case for it is wholly dependent on its utility to capitalist markets. Without acknowledging the higher collective purpose that education serves, we won’t be able to defend public schools or democratic governance.

*NOTE 23: Your diagnosis is correct. Your treatment is dangerously wrong.
Schools should inculcate values such as the honor and dignity of all persons,
the value of hard work, the principle of non-aggression, tolerance for
differences in religion and moral philosophy. May I also mention the success
pipeline: education, job, marriage, children, in that order.*

## Democracy or Capitalism

“Republican politicians and their strategists,” Nancy MacLean told Jacobin, have seen . . . culture-war tactics help Jair Bolsonaro get elected in Brazil and Viktor Orbán get reelected in Hungary this spring. And, lo, the CPAC (the Conservative Political Action Committee) is traveling to Hungary . . . to learn from Orbán how to use the tools of democracy to rig the rules to achieve autocracy.  The long plot is reaching maturity.

*NOTE 24: Conspiracies everywhere! Round up the usual suspects!*

The Right’s appeals to “the family” resonate in part because our oligarchic political system leaves families in the cold, allowing child poverty to soar even as parents spend long and exhausting hours working outside the home. Any effort to save our commons and restore a sense of public spiritedness must include a material response to the significant challenges that parents face.

*NOTE 25: Again, too much to unpack. I believe that parents should love,
educate, and instill moral values in their children. The family is the basis
for a civilized society, and by "family" I mean a married couple, male and
female, in a monogamous, permanent union, living together and providing both
paternal and maternal role models to their children. It is indubitably the
responsibility of the schools to act as an adunct to parents in order to
instill these values in the children. It's the responsibility of the parents
to educate their children --- all the schools can do is support the
parents.*

We need to work fast to reclaim the places where we give one another the benefit of the doubt and collaborate in spite of our differences. Democrats can still enter the battlefield and expose the Right’s deceitful efforts to turn the public against itself. As MacLean argues, the movement Buchanan authored wants to save capitalism from democracy. We can counter it if we are willing to fight to save democracy — beginning with schools — from capitalism.

*NOTE 26: I don't like the word "capitalist" but since you used it, I will as
well. Democracy can only exist in a capitalist system. Collectivism in all its
forms necessitates tyranny. The word I would use for capitalism is liberalism,
but this is another conversation.*

*FINAL NOTE: I am absolutely committed to education, and I mean universal, public education. I am also absolutely committed to liberalism, by which I mean the recognition that the individual's life, liberty, and property is the highest value of government. What we usually call "family values" supports both education and liberty. Collectivism attacks all three viciously, because collectivism cannot exist in the face of universal, public education, strong liberal principles, and moral values. Too many "professional educators" fail to recognize this, to the detriment of our schools, both public and private. If this is a call to Kulturkampf, so be it.* 
